

--- CONTENT FROM: https://www.kenhub.com/en/library/anatomy/cells-of-the-blood ---
Cells of the blood

Introduction

Erythrocytes

Red blood cells

Hemoglobin

Leukocytes

Neutrophils

Lymphocytes

Eosinophils

Basophils

Monocytes

Thrombocytes

Blood clot formation

Sources

Learning anatomy isn't impossible.We're here to help.

Want access to this video?

Want access to this quiz?

Want access to this gallery?

Register nowand grab your free ultimate anatomy study guide!

Author: 
Julie Doll, MSc
•Reviewer: 
Francesca Salvador, MScLast reviewed: July 06, 2023Reading time: 10 minutes

In this article we will describe the different types of blood cells.Bloodis specialized fluid connectivetissue. It travels through thecirculatory systemtransporting gases, nutrients, wastes, and other macromolecules throughout the body. The main gases traveling in the blood are oxygen and carbon dioxide. Circulating macromolecules include hormones, nutrients, plasma proteins, and some humoral components of the immune system. Blood also acts as a buffer to maintain homeostasis and partakes in regulation of body temperature.

Blood is made up of two main components: blood cells and plasma. Theplasma, an aqueous solution, is mostly made up of water but contains some important solutes. About 7-8% of the plasma is made up of the proteins albumin, globulins, and fibrinogen. Other solutes, only 1-2% of plasma, include electrolytes such as Na+ and Ca+, urea and uric acid, glucose, lipids, hormones, and gases.Blood cellsare classified as either erythrocytes or leukocytes.Erythrocytesare commonly referred to as red blood cells or RBCs. Leukocytes are white blood cells, or WBC. A smaller third cellular constituent are thethrombocytes(platelets).

In routine laboratory testing, blood can be spun down in acentrifugeto separate the plasma from the blood cells. Spinning down the cells reveals the hematocrit of the blood. Thehematocritis a measure of the erythrocyte content of a blood sample. A normal reading is between 39-50%. Males have a slightly higher hematocrit than females. Leukocytes and platelets separate from the hematocrit and form a small buffy coat between the plasma and erythrocytes.

Erythrocytes, or red blood cells (RBCs), have predictable dimensions which makes them a good“histologic ruler”. They are circular with a diameter of 7.8 micrometers. Erythrocytes are shaped likebiconcavediscs(donut). At their perimeter they are 2.6 micrometers thick, at the center they are only 0.8 micrometers thick. This shape increases the cell's surface area to allow for more oxygen binding. Because these dimensions are typically consistent, leukocytes can be identified by comparing their size to that of the erythrocytes.

The shape of erythrocytes depends largely onmembrane proteins. Integral and peripheral membrane proteins maintain the biconcave shape of erythrocytes. There are more integral membrane proteins in the lipid bilayer than peripheral membrane proteins. They are classified as either glycophorin or band 3 proteins.Band 3 proteinsbind to hemoglobin and act as an anchor for cytoskeletal proteins.Glycophorinproteins form the main attachments between the lipid bilayer and thecytoskeleton.

Hemoglobin is a globular protein found in erythrocytes. It is capable of binding and carrying several gases, including the vasodilatornitrous oxide, but its main function is to transportoxygenandcarbon dioxide. Blood carries oxygen away from thelungsto the periphery and carbon dioxide from peripheral tissues back to the lung to facilitate gas exchange in the alveoli. A hemoglobin protein is made up of four polypeptide chains; twoalphachainsand twobetachains, each featuring ahemegroupcapable of binding oxygen. The heme group itself is shaped like a ring with an iron atom in the center.

Oxygen binds to hemoglobin throughpositive cooperation. That is, once an oxygen ion binds to a heme group, the iron atom is shifted in the ring which facilitates the binding of oxygen ions to the remaining three heme groups. The erythrocytes can then transport oxygen from the lungs to tissues throughout the body. There are approximately 250 million hemoglobin proteins in each erythrocyte therefore one red blood cell can carry around one billion oxygen ions at once.

Leukocytes, also called White Blood Cells (WBCs), are associated with the immune system. There are three main classifications of leukocytes:lymphocytes, granulocytes, and agranulocytes.Granulocytes, as their name suggests, are white blood cells that have granules present in their cytoplasm.Agranulocytesdo not have these granules. Using a  special histological staining method (Wright’s Stain), leukocytes can be seen under a microscope. This stain includes azure B to stain the granules in the cytoplasm of white blood cells so that they can be differentiated.

Leukocytes are classified by both the shape of their nuclei and the presence or absence of azurophilic granules in their cytoplasm.Neutrophils, basophils, andeosinophilsare all polymorphonuclear granulocytes.Polymorphonuclear cellshave nuclei with multiple lobes. Monocytes and lymphocytes are mononuclear agranulocytes.Mononuclear cellshave a single nucleus. The buffy coat, seen when blood is spun down in a centrifuge to separate its cellular components, is generally made up of 60-70% neutrophils, 20-25% lymphocytes, 3-8% monocytes, 2-4% eosinophils, and less than 1% basophils.

Neutrophils make up over half of the volume of white blood cells. The cytoplasm stains lightly and contains small, lavender coloredgranules. They are about 12-15 micrometers in diameter and have dark-stainingmultilobed nuclei. There are three types of granules in the cytoplasm of neutrophils: specific or secondary granules, azurophilic granules, and tertiary granules.

Specific granulesare the smallest and most numerous and contain several enzymes: phospholipase and type IV collagenase.Azurophilic granulesare the neutrophils’ lysosomes. There are two types oftertiary granulesthat contain either phosphatases or metalloproteinases. Neutrophils are active phagocytes that engulf bacteria. They can be considered the first responders of the (innate) immune system as they are often the first leukocytes to be activated in response to a pathogen.

The large,rounded nucleusof a lymphocyte takes up most of the volume of the cell and stains very dark blue. The cytoplasm appears as a narrow, lightly stained rim around the large nucleus where it does not contain granules.

Lymphocytes, the main functional cells of the immune system, are further classified by function and origin. For example,NK (natural killer) cellsdestroy virus infected and cancerous cells,B lymphocytesare involved in the production of circulating antibodies, andT lymphocytesare involved in cell-mediated immunity. Immunohistochemistry is required to identify individual types of lymphocytes in microscopy.

Eosinophils contain manybrightly staining granulesin their cytoplasm that give them a characteristic pink color when viewed with a Wright’s stain. Theirbilobed nucleistain lightly in comparison to the granules. Eosinophils are also about 12-15 micrometers in diameter. Eosinophils releasehistaminaseduring  allergic reactions and are associated with inflammatory responses and helminthic responses to parasitic and protozoan infections.

Basophils are the least abundant leukocytes in the blood; however, they are the largest granulocyte. The cytoplasm of basophils contains manyblue granulesthat obscure the lightly stainedbilobed nucleus. Basophils are associated with allergic responses as well: they releasehistamineand vasoactive agents to dilate blood vessels thereby intensifying the allergic reaction.

Monocytes are the largest leukocytes circulating in the blood at 12-20 micrometers in diameter. They are agranulocytes with a light andfoamy cytoplasm. Monocytes are easily identified by their size and their large, kidney orhorse-shoe shaped nucleus.

In the periphery, monocytes differentiate into phagocyticmacrophages.Phagocytosisis a process in which a cell engulfs and ingest a macromolecule or microorganism. Themacrophagesdifferentiate further upon reaching their target tissues.Kupffer cellsare found in theliver.Alveolarmacrophages are found in the lung. The red pulp of thespleencontainssplenicmacrophages.Peritonealmacrophages are found free-floating in peritoneal fluid.Microglial cellsare specialized macrophages found in thenervous system.

Thrombocytes, more commonly known asplatelets, are small, formed elements found throughout the blood. Because they do not contain a nucleus or organelles, they are not considered to be true cells. Rather, they arecell fragmentsderived frommegakaryocytes, polyploid cells found in bone marrow. At only 2-4 micrometers in diameter, they are significantly smaller than any other cellular structures in the blood. Functionally, platelets are essential for forming clots in response to tears in blood vessels.

Blood clots are formed in response to injury/trauma of a blood vessel. The four basic steps to coagulation are:

In more detail, a tear in a blood vessel exposescollagen. Platelets bind to the exposed collagen through membrane proteins calledintegrins. This binding activates the platelets and they release serotonin, ADP, and platelets-activating factor. More platelets are recruited to the site of injury by theplatelets-activating factor.

Platelets-activating factor simultaneously activates pathways to convert phospholipids in the membranes: thromboxane A2.Thromboxane A2andserotoninact as vasoconstrictors and contribute to platelet accumulation. Ultimately, the recruited platelets form aplatelet plugthat will be converted to a clot through the coagulation cascade. Thecoagulation cascadeis a series of reactions that results in the conversion of fibrinogen to fibrin and the formation of a cross-linkedfibrin meshthat traps erythrocytes.

References:

Cells of the blood: want to learn more about it?

Our engaging videos, interactive quizzes, in-depth articles and HD atlas are here to get you top results faster.

What do you prefer to learn with?

“I would honestly say that Kenhub cut my study time in half.”
–Read more.

Register nowand grab your free ultimate anatomy study guide!

Grounded on academic literature and research, validated by experts, and trusted by more than 5 million users.Read more.

Kenhub fosters a safe learning environment through diverse model representation, inclusive terminology and open communication with our users.Read more.

Copyright ©
2025
Kenhub.
All rights reserved.

Learning anatomy is a massive undertaking, and we're here to help you pass with flying colours.

...it takes less than 60 seconds!

...it takes less than 60 seconds!

...it takes less than 60 seconds!
--- END CONTENT ---
